Documentation/40 add tutorial (#41)
exasol/row-level-security: doc/user_guide/tutorial.md

# Row Level Security Tutorial

## Introduction

This tutorial demonstrates row-level security based on a concrete example. We are going to use a [taxi trips dataset](https://data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Taxi-Trips/wrvz-psew) kindly provided for public use by the city of Chicago.

> ### What you Will Learn

Reviewer: Is this capitalization of "Will Learn" intended

Author: Yep. We use [Associated-Press-style headline capitalization rules](https://www.thebalancesmb.com/associated-press-cheat-sheet-1360728#mntl-sc-block_1-0-7).

> Working through this tutorial you will learn you the following things:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Working through this tutorial you will learn the following things:
```

1. Import a publicly available dataset into Exasol
1. Create a view that establishes row-ownership based on business data

> 1. Create an RLS Virtual Schema

Reviewer: The RLS acronym is never introduced in this document

Author: Added section "Terms and Abbreviations".

> 1. Access and access restrictions with RLS

Reviewer: ah, I don't understand the first "Access"

Author: That was indeed confusing. I removed it.

### Target Audience

> This tutorial is targeted at database users and administrators wanting to learn more about Exaso's row-level security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial is targeted at database users and administrators wanting to learn more about Exasol's row-level security.
```

> We assume our readers have firm knowledge of database principles in general and the SQL language in particular. Also readers should be able to setup an Exasol database or at least have administrator access to an existing one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We assume our readers have firm knowledge of database principles in general and the SQL language in particular. Also readers should be able to setup an Exasol database or at least have administrator access to an existing one with internet access and configured name servers.
```

### About the Dataset

> We are using a dataset provided to the public by the City of Chicago. This dataset contains a collection of taxi trips. The collection started 2013 and still keeps going. So the dataset grows all the time.

Reviewer: I would add a link to dataset offer or description

Author: Added.

> 

Reviewer: Add a description of the dataset, that is consists of several sub datasets provided by the taxi companies, otherwise the reader gets confused in the next sections

Author: Added.

### The RLS Scenario

For the sake of the tutorial we are imagining that we are the Department of Business Affairs & Consumer Protection (BACP). We are collecting the data and are allowed to see every dataset. The taxi companies on the other hand are only allowed to see the datasets that they themselves provide. This is a archetypal row-level security scenario.

Quite possibly that might be the deal the City of Chicago has with the taxi companies when it comes to handling the raw data &mdash; i.e. the data before [masking](#data-privacy-and-masking) is applied.

### Requirements and Assumptions

At the beginning of each IT project you should make a list of requirements, assumptions and constraints. Make sure you know which is which.

Requirements:

1. You (in your example the BACP) want to see all datasets
1. Each taxi company sees its own dataset

Constraints:

1. RLS runs on the same Exasol instance or cluster that it protects

Assumptions:

1. Each dataset is written once
1. Datasets are never modified
1. The same dataset will be read a lot of times
1. Reading speed is far more important than writing speed

> Over the course of you IT project you will want to verify you assumptions. For the sake of this tutorial let's assume they are true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over the course of your IT project you will want to verify your assumptions. For the sake of this tutorial let's assume they are true.
```

### Actors

We can idendify three different actor types in our scenario:

1. Database administrator (`SYS`) user who creates the initial users and schemas
1. Department of Business Affairs & Consumer Protection (`BACP`)
1. Taxi companies

Each will be represented by a separate database user.

## RLS Design Considerations

Before you start to dive into setting up the database, let's first discuss a few design considerations.

> ### Staging Area an Production

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Staging Area and Production
```

Here is are a few samples:

    0118 - 42111 Godfrey S.Awir
    0694 - 59280 Chinesco Trans Inc
    1085 - 72312 N and W Cab Co
    ...
    3141 - Zip Cab
    ...
    American United Cab Association
    ...

As you can see, the company names are not uniform. Also they contain spaces and special characters. If we want to use them to define tenancy, we need to unify them ourselves. And, since the values in the column `EXA_ROW_TENANT` are compared to user names, we need to turn them into proper identifiers.

### Options for Populating the `EXA_ROW_TENANT` Column

There are many ways to populate the `EXA_ROW_TENANT` column.

1. View on the staging table
1. View on the production table
1. Built directly into the merge from stage to production

Using views follows the Single-responsibility principle (SRP). The view is responsible for turning a business element into an identifier in the column `EXA_ROW_TENANT`. RLS takes care of protecting the data row by comparing the current user with the identifier in that column.

If you put the view on the production table, you can change the mapping without re-importing the data. On the other hand this comes at the expense of performance.

> In our assumption list we earlier defined that reading speed is key, so we are definitely pre-calculating the column contents. That leaves us with the choice between view on the stage and building the mapping into the load from stage to production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our assumption list we earlier defined that reading speed is key, so we are definitely pre-calculating the column contents. That leaves us with the choice between view on the staging area and building the mapping into the load from staging area to production.
```
stage sounds unfamiliar for my ears

        REGEXP_REPLACE(
            REGEXP_REPLACE(TR.COMPANY, '^[-0-9 ]*'),
        '\W+', '_'
        ),
        '_*$', ''
    )
)
FROM CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.V_TRIPS TR;
```

Note that this time we are copying the data from a view.

The ID is an upper-case, underscore-connected version of the company name. Leading numbers and trailing underscores are removed.

Let's take a look at the IDs this creates.

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT(COMPANY), EXA_ROW_TENANT
FROM CHICAGO_TAXI.TRIPS
ORDER BY EXA_ROW_TENANT;
```

| COMPANY                      | EXA_ROW_TENANT |
|------------------------------|----------------|
| 4053 - 40193 Adwar H. Nikola | ADWAR_H_NIKOLA |
| 5074 - 54002 Ahzmi Inc       | AHZMI_INC      |
| &hellip;                     | &hellip;       |
| Yellow Cab                   | YELLOW_CAB     |
| &hellip;                     | &hellip;       |
| 3141 - 87803 Zip Cab         | ZIP_CAB        |
| 3141 - Zip Cab               | ZIP_CAB        |
| &hellip;                     | &hellip;       |
| 5129 - 87128                 | `NULL`         |

As you can see, the mapping is not perfect. There are two rows that produce the same ID (`ZIP_CAB`) and one that produces a `NULL`.

> I a real-world scenario you would spend more effort to disambiguate the ID generation and make sure that `NULL`s don't happen. For the sake of this tutorial though the naive approach will have to suffice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a real-world scenario you would spend more effort to disambiguate the ID generation and make sure that `NULL`s don't happen. For the sake of this tutorial though the naive approach will have to suffice.
```

## Protecting the Data with RLS

### Creating the RLS Virtual Schema

> Exasol's row-level security implementation is a [Virtual Schema](https://github.com/exasol/virtual-schemas). If know how views work, then consider Virtual Schemas a closely related concept.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Exasol's row-level security implementation is a [Virtual Schema](https://github.com/exasol/virtual-schemas). If you know how views work, then consider Virtual Schemas a closely related concept.
```

> A Virtual Schema is a projection of an underlying concrete schema. In the case of RLS it add a filter layer that makes sure that users only see what they are supposed to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Virtual Schema is a projection of an underlying concrete schema. In the case of RLS it adds a filter layer that makes sure that users only see what they are supposed to.
```

> Please refer to the [user guide](user_guide.md) for detailed instructions on how to install the RLS package.

Reviewer: Maybe use direct link to the section in the user guide like this

[user guide](https://github.com/exasol/row-level-security/blob/master/doc/user_guide/user_guide.md#creating-the-virtual-schema)

Author: Done.

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE JAVA ADAPTER SCRIPT RLS_VSADAPTER_SCHEMA.RLS_VSADAPTER AS
    %scriptclass com.exasol.adapter.RequestDispatcher;
    %jar /buckets/bfsdefault/jars/row-level-security-dist-1.0.1.jar;
/
;

CREATE CONNECTION EXASOL_JDBC_CONNECTION 
TO 'jdbc:exa:localhost:8563' 
USER 'BACP' 
IDENTIFIED BY '<password>';

CREATE VIRTUAL SCHEMA RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS 
USING RLS_VSADAPTER_SCHEMA.RLS_VSADAPTER 
WITH
SQL_DIALECT     = 'EXASOL_RLS'
CONNECTION_NAME = 'EXASOL_JDBC_CONNECTION'
SCHEMA_NAME     = 'CHICAGO_TAXI'
IS_LOCAL        = 'true';
```

Note that `IS_LOCAL` is important.

### Creating a User Account

Next step is to create a user account that you will need in order to see the effect RLS has.

One of the taxi companies is called "Zip Cab" and the corresponding entry in the `EXA_ROW_TENANT` column is `ZIP_CAB`.

So please create a user account with that name, allow it to log in and grant the `SELECT` privilege on the RLS Virtual Schema.

```sql
CREATE USER ZIP_CAB IDENTIFIED BY "<password>";
GRANT CREATE SESSION TO ZIP_CAB;
GRANT SELECT ON RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS TO ZIP_CAB;
```

### Querying the Data as Non-privileged User

> Now's the moment of truth. You are going to impersonate a taxi company an verify that we only see entries that this company should be able to see.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now is the moment of truth. You are going to impersonate a taxi company and verify that we only see entries that this company should be able to see.
```
Shortenings in written form are usually to be avoided

```sql
SELECT COMPANY, COUNT(1)
FROM RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS.TRIPS
GROUP BY COMPANY
ORDER BY COMPANY;
```

In the second case you only see the number of trips that Zip Cab made &mdash; and there are no other companies listed.

## Profiling

If you are curious about how queries using RLS perform, you can use [Exasol's profiling feature](https://docs.exasol.com/administration/on-premise/support/profiling_information.htm).

Run the following example as user `ZIP_CAB`. It demonstrates how Exasol executes a query that joins the large fact table and a dimension table. There is a narrow filter on the fact table and we want to see that this filter is applied _before_ the join.

Otherwise an unnecessarily large amount of data would go into the join.

First, switch profiling on, then run the query. Immediately afterwards, deactivate profiling to avoid flooding the log.

```sql
ALTER SESSION SET PROFILE = 'on';

SELECT *
FROM RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS.TRIPS
LEFT JOIN RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS.COMMUNITY_AREAS ON TRIPS.PICKUP_COMMUNITY_AREA=COMMUNITY_AREAS.AREA_NUMBER
WHERE RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS.TRIPS.TRIP_SECONDS < 400;

ALTER SESSION SET PROFILE = 'off';

FLUSH STATISTICS;
```

> Now let's take a look at the profiling data we collected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now lets take a look at the profiling data we collected
```

Author: Not quite. :-)

https://www.grammarly.com/blog/lets-vs-lets/

# Row Level Security Tutorial

## Introduction

This tutorial demonstrates row-level security based on a concrete example. We are going to use a [taxi trips dataset](https://data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Taxi-Trips/wrvz-psew) kindly provided for public use by the city of Chicago.

### What you Will Learn

Working through this tutorial you will learn the following things:

1. Import a publicly available dataset into Exasol
1. Create a view that establishes row-ownership based on business data
1. Create an RLS Virtual Schema
1. Access restrictions with RLS

### Target Audience

This tutorial is targeted at database users and administrators wanting to learn more about Exasol's row-level security.

> We assume our readers have firm knowledge of database principles in general and the SQL language in particular. Also readers should be able to setup an Exasol database or at least have administrator access to an existing one with internet access and configured name servers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We assume our readers have a firm knowledge of database principles in general and the SQL language in particular. Also readers should be able to set up an Exasol database or at least have administrator access to an existing one with internet access and configured name servers.
```

> ### Terms and Abbreviations

Reviewer 2: The Terms and Abbreviations come after the first use of RLS abbreviation. Maybe it should be before it?

Author: Turned abbreviation into full text in this list.

<dl>
<dt>RLS</dt><dd>See "Row Level Security"</dd>
<dt>Row Level Security</dt><dd>Data access restrictions in a database on the level of an individual dataset (aka. "row").</dt>
<dl>

### About the Dataset

> We are using a dataset provided to the public by the City of Chicago. This dataset contains a [collection of taxi trips](https://digital.cityofchicago.org/index.php/chicago-taxi-data-released/). The collection started 2013 and still keeps going. So the dataset grows all the time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are using a dataset provided to the public by the City of Chicago. This dataset contains a [collection of taxi trips](https://digital.cityofchicago.org/index.php/chicago-taxi-data-released/). The collection started in 2013 and still keeps going. So the dataset grows all the time.
```

The dataset consists of one large fact table containing the actual taxi rides with details like start and end time, pickup and drop-off area.

> Additionally, two dimension tables provide more information about the community areas where trips start end end and the [census tracts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Census_tract#United_States).

Reviewer 2: ` start end end and ` 
What does it mean?

Reviewer 2: what is a dimension table? I googled and it's still not clear to me

Author: Added description of dimension and fact.
Fixed broken sentence.

### Data Privacy and Masking

For privacy reasons the datasets use masking techniques that prevent tracking the passengers, so don't expect exact times or start and end addresses. Still, for our purposes the dataset provides lots of real-life content and is large enough to test the performance of RLS properly.

### The RLS Scenario

> For the sake of the tutorial we are imagining that we are the Department of Business Affairs & Consumer Protection (BACP). We are collecting the data and are allowed to see every dataset. The taxi companies on the other hand are only allowed to see the datasets that they themselves provide. This is a archetypal row-level security scenario.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the sake of the tutorial we are imagining that we are the Department of Business Affairs & Consumer Protection (BACP). We are collecting the data and are allowed to see every dataset. The taxi companies, on the other hand, are only allowed to see the datasets that they themselves provide. This is an archetypal row-level security scenario.
```

Quite possibly that might be the deal the City of Chicago has with the taxi companies when it comes to handling the raw data &mdash; i.e. the data before [masking](#data-privacy-and-masking) is applied.

### Requirements and Assumptions

At the beginning of each IT project you should make a list of requirements, assumptions and constraints. Make sure you know which is which.

Requirements:

> 1. You (in your example the BACP) want to see all datasets

Reviewer 2: Can we add `BACP` to the list of abbreviations?

Author: Added.

1. Each taxi company sees its own dataset

Constraints:

1. RLS runs on the same Exasol instance or cluster that it protects

Assumptions:

1. Each dataset is written once
1. Datasets are never modified
1. The same dataset will be read a lot of times
1. Reading speed is far more important than writing speed

> Over the course of you IT project you will want to verify you assumptions. For the sake of this tutorial let's assume they are true.

Reviewer 2: Have you applied Torsten's suggestion here? I still see the typos.

Author: Strangely enough not. Fixed.

### Actors

We can idendify three different actor types in our scenario:

1. Database administrator (`SYS`) user who creates the initial users and schemas
1. Department of Business Affairs & Consumer Protection (`BACP`)
1. Taxi companies

Each will be represented by a separate database user.

## RLS Design Considerations

Before you start to dive into setting up the database, let's first discuss a few design considerations.

### Staging Area and Production

> Separating the import from production is a best practice for data ingestion, so we are going to have a stating area dedicated to importing the data from the servers of the City of Chicago. And a production area, where the actual work is done.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Separating the import from production is the best practice for data ingestion, so we are going to have a stating area dedicated to importing the data from the servers of the City of Chicago. And a production area, where the actual work is done.
```

### The `EXA_ROW_TENANT` Column

We are going to implement [tenant-based security](user_guide.md#tenant-based-security) in this tutorial and therefore need to add the column `EXA_ROW_TENANT` to the fact table (i.e. the taxi rides).

> Now, the dataset already contains a column for the company, but that one is free format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, the dataset already contains a column for the company, but that one is a free format.
```

Author: Rephrased:
> Now, the dataset already contains a column for the company, but that one does not have a strict format.

Here is are a few samples:

    0118 - 42111 Godfrey S.Awir
    0694 - 59280 Chinesco Trans Inc
    1085 - 72312 N and W Cab Co
    ...
    3141 - Zip Cab
    ...
    American United Cab Association
    ...

As you can see, the company names are not uniform. Also they contain spaces and special characters. If we want to use them to define tenancy, we need to unify them ourselves. And, since the values in the column `EXA_ROW_TENANT` are compared to user names, we need to turn them into proper identifiers.

### Options for Populating the `EXA_ROW_TENANT` Column

There are many ways to populate the `EXA_ROW_TENANT` column.

1. View on the staging table
1. View on the production table
1. Built directly into the merge from stage to production

Using views follows the Single-responsibility principle (SRP). The view is responsible for turning a business element into an identifier in the column `EXA_ROW_TENANT`. RLS takes care of protecting the data row by comparing the current user with the identifier in that column.

If you put the view on the production table, you can change the mapping without re-importing the data. On the other hand this comes at the expense of performance.

> In our assumption list we earlier defined that reading speed is key, so we are definitely pre-calculating the column contents. That leaves us with the choice between view on the staging area and building the mapping into the load from staging area to production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our assumption list we earlier defined that reading speed is key, so we are definitely pre-calculating the column contents. That leaves us with the choice between the view on the staging area and building the mapping into the load from the staging area to production.
```

Author: Took over the first "the".

> For the sake of simplicity, we pick the later option.

Reviewer 2: the later option -> the last option?

Reviewer 2: or latter?

Author: Should be last.

## Structuring the Database

### Creating the Schemas

Staging area and production are organized in two separate schemas, which you create using the following commands as the database administrator.

```sql
CREATE SCHEMA CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE;
CREATE SCHEMA CHICAGO_TAXI;
```

### Creating the Schema Owner User Account

In our example you are the BACP and you own the two schemas, so let's create that user now.

```sql
CREATE USER BACP IDENTIFIED BY "<password>";
```

Next you transfer ownership of the two schemas to `BACP`.

```sql
ALTER SCHEMA CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE CHANGE OWNER BACP;
ALTER SCHEMA CHICAGO_TAXI CHANGE OWNER BACP;
```

> And finally you assign the global rights to login, create tables and views as well as run imports to that user. Additionally all privileges on the two schemas.

Reviewer 2: Is `login` supposed to be a verb? If yes -> `log in`

Author: Fixed.

```sql
GRANT CREATE SESSION, CREATE TABLE, CREATE VIEW, IMPORT TO BACP;
GRANT ALL ON CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE TO BACP;
GRANT ALL ON CHICAGO_TAXI TO BACP;
```

Now log into Exasol as user `BACP` for the next steps.

### Creating a Staging Area

> First create the staging table for the taxi trips. This will hold the import from the large fact table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, create the staging table for the taxi trips. This will hold the import from the large fact table.
```

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.TRIPS (
    TRIP_ID VARCHAR(40),
    TAXI_ID VARCHAR(255),
    TRIP_START_TIMESTAMP VARCHAR(24),
    TRIP_END_TIMESTAMP VARCHAR(24),
    TRIP_SECONDS DECIMAL(9),
    TRIP_MILES DECIMAL(18,4),
    PICKUP_CENSUS_TRACT VARCHAR(100),
    DROPOFF_CENSUS_TRACT VARCHAR(100),
    PICKUP_COMMUNITY_AREA DECIMAL,
    DROPOFF_COMMUNITY_AREA DECIMAL,
    FARE VARCHAR(100),
    TIPS VARCHAR(100),
    TOLLS VARCHAR(100),
    EXTRAS VARCHAR(100),
    TRIP_TOTAL VARCHAR(100),
    PAYMENT_TYPE VARCHAR(100),
    COMPANY VARCHAR(100),
    PICKUP_CENTROID_LATITUDE DECIMAL(18,9),
    PICKUP_CENTROID_LONGITUDE DECIMAL(18,9),
    PICKUP_CENTROID_LOCATION VARCHAR(100),
    DROPOFF_CENTROID_LATITUDE NUMERIC(18,9),
    DROPOFF_CENTROID_LONGITUDE NUMERIC(18,9),
    DROPOFF_CENTROID_LOCATION VARCHAR(100)
);
```

> Unfortunately we have to define the timestamps as `VARCHAR` for this particular table. The table is large and the only current way to limit the number of records during download is to use an API that produces a timestamp format that Exasol's importer up to 6.2.x does not recognize.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, we have to define the timestamps as `VARCHAR` for this particular table. The table is large and the only current way to limit the number of records during download is to use an API that produces a timestamp format that Exasol's importer up to 6.2.x does not recognize.
```

Reviewer 2: You hate commas, don't you? :D

Author: In English there are a lot fewer commas than in other languages. But you a right: here we need one.

    TRIP_TOTAL, PAYMENT_TYPE, COMPANY,
    PICKUP_CENTROID_LATITUDE, PICKUP_CENTROID_LONGITUDE,
    PICKUP_CENTROID_LOCATION, DROPOFF_CENTROID_LATITUDE,
    DROPOFF_CENTROID_LONGITUDE, DROPOFF_CENTROID_LOCATION
FROM CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.TRIPS;
```

The two accompanying dimension tables are rather small, so we can later afford to use an API that does not support limiting the number of rows but gives us a recognized timestamp format directly. No view magic needed.

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.CENSUS_TRACTS(
    THE_GEOM VARCHAR(2000000),
    STATEFP10 DECIMAL(9),
    COUNTYFP10 DECIMAL(9),
    TRACTCE10 DECIMAL(9),
    GEOID10 DECIMAL(11),
    NAME10 DECIMAL(9),
    NAMELSAD10 VARCHAR(100),
    COMMAREA DECIMAL(9),
    COMMAREA_N DECIMAL(9),
    NOTES VARCHAR(1000)
);

CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.COMMUNITY_AREAS(
    THE_GEOM VARCHAR(2000000),
    PERIMETER DECIMAL(9),
    AREA DECIMAL(9),
    COMAREA_ DECIMAL(9),
    COMAREA_ID DECIMAL(9),
    AREA_NUMBER DECIMAL(9),
    COMMUNITY VARCHAR(100),
    AREA_NUM_1 DECIMAL(9),
    SHAPE_AREA DOUBLE,
    SHAPE_LEN DOUBLE
);
```

### Creating a Production Area

> First you create the table with the taxi trips, using the `V_TRIPS` view from the staging area as template and adding the `EXA_ROW_TENANT`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, you create the table with the taxi trips, using the `V_TRIPS` view from the staging area as a template and adding the `EXA_ROW_TENANT`.
```

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE CHICAGO_TAXI.TRIPS
(LIKE CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.V_TRIPS, EXA_ROW_TENANT VARCHAR(128));
```

In case of the dimension tables you simply make a 1:1 copy.

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE CHICAGO_TAXI.CENSUS_TRACTS
(LIKE CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.CENSUS_TRACTS);

CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE CHICAGO_TAXI.COMMUNITY_AREAS
(LIKE CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.COMMUNITY_AREAS);
```

## Importing the Data Into the Staging Area

> Let's first import the two smaller tables for practice, this this is quite fast.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's first import the two smaller tables for practice, this is quite fast.
```

```sql
IMPORT INTO CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.CENSUS_TRACTS
FROM CSV AT 'https://data.cityofchicago.org/api/views/74p9-q2aq'
FILE 'rows.csv?accessType=DOWNLOAD'
SKIP=1;

IMPORT INTO CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.COMMUNITY_AREAS
FROM CSV AT 'https://data.cityofchicago.org/api/views/igwz-8jzy' FILE 'rows.csv?accessType=DOWNLOAD'
SKIP=1;
```

Both commands tell the EXALoader to directly [import](https://docs.exasol.com/sql/import.htm) the data from a download URL in [CSV](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4180) format.

> Skipping the first line removes the header fields from the dataset.

Reviewer 2: This sentence was hard to understand. I thought that I have to skip something

Author: Rephrased:
> The `SKIP=1` option removes the header fields from the dataset.

```sql
INSERT INTO CHICAGO_TAXI.TRIPS
SELECT TR.*,
UPPER(
    REGEXP_REPLACE(
        REGEXP_REPLACE(
            REGEXP_REPLACE(TR.COMPANY, '^[-0-9 ]*'),
        '\W+', '_'
        ),
        '_*$', ''
    )
)
FROM CHICAGO_TAXI_STAGE.V_TRIPS TR;
```

Note that this time we are copying the data from a view.

The ID is an upper-case, underscore-connected version of the company name. Leading numbers and trailing underscores are removed.

Let's take a look at the IDs this creates.

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT(COMPANY), EXA_ROW_TENANT
FROM CHICAGO_TAXI.TRIPS
ORDER BY EXA_ROW_TENANT;
```

| COMPANY                      | EXA_ROW_TENANT |
|------------------------------|----------------|
| 4053 - 40193 Adwar H. Nikola | ADWAR_H_NIKOLA |
| 5074 - 54002 Ahzmi Inc       | AHZMI_INC      |
| &hellip;                     | &hellip;       |
| Yellow Cab                   | YELLOW_CAB     |
| &hellip;                     | &hellip;       |
| 3141 - 87803 Zip Cab         | ZIP_CAB        |
| 3141 - Zip Cab               | ZIP_CAB        |
| &hellip;                     | &hellip;       |
| 5129 - 87128                 | `NULL`         |

> As you can see, the mapping is not perfect. There are two rows that produce the same ID (`ZIP_CAB`) and one that produces a `NULL`.

Reviewer 2: I didn't find a NULL value in my table after running the command.

In a real-world scenario you would spend more effort to disambiguate the ID generation and make sure that `NULL`s don't happen. For the sake of this tutorial though the naive approach will have to suffice.

## Protecting the Data with RLS

### Creating the RLS Virtual Schema

Exasol's row-level security implementation is a [Virtual Schema](https://github.com/exasol/virtual-schemas). If you know how views work, then consider Virtual Schemas a closely related concept.

> A Virtual Schema is a projection of an underlying concrete schema. In the case of RLS it adds a filter layer that makes sure that users only see what they are supposed to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Virtual Schema is a projection of an underlying concrete schema. In the case of RLS, it adds a filter layer that makes sure that users only see what they are supposed to.
```

Please refer to the [user guide](user_guide.md#creating-the-virtual-schema) for detailed instructions on how to install the RLS package.

```sql

> CREATE OR REPLACE JAVA ADAPTER SCRIPT RLS_VSADAPTER_SCHEMA.RLS_VSADAPTER AS

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can use one of the existing schemas or add a create schema statement here for a users' convenience?

Author: I added the creation of the missing schema.

    %scriptclass com.exasol.adapter.RequestDispatcher;
    %jar /buckets/bfsdefault/jars/row-level-security-dist-1.0.1.jar;
/
;

> CREATE CONNECTION EXASOL_JDBC_CONNECTION 

Reviewer 2: We should mark that our user `BACP` doesn't have enough privileges to do it and we should do it under the SYS or give additional privileges to `BACP`

Author: Added that this must be executed as user `SYS`.

TO 'jdbc:exa:localhost:8563' 
USER 'BACP' 
IDENTIFIED BY '<password>';

> CREATE VIRTUAL SCHEMA RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS 

Reviewer 2: Is it supposed to be done with SYS or  BACP? BACP doesn't have privileges

Author: It should be `SYS`.

USING RLS_VSADAPTER_SCHEMA.RLS_VSADAPTER 
WITH
SQL_DIALECT     = 'EXASOL_RLS'
CONNECTION_NAME = 'EXASOL_JDBC_CONNECTION'
SCHEMA_NAME     = 'CHICAGO_TAXI'
IS_LOCAL        = 'true';
```

Note that `IS_LOCAL` is important.

### Creating a User Account

> Next step is to create a user account that you will need in order to see the effect RLS has.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next step is to create a user account that you will need in order to see the effect RLS has.
```

One of the taxi companies is called "Zip Cab" and the corresponding entry in the `EXA_ROW_TENANT` column is `ZIP_CAB`.

So please create a user account with that name, allow it to log in and grant the `SELECT` privilege on the RLS Virtual Schema.

```sql
CREATE USER ZIP_CAB IDENTIFIED BY "<password>";
GRANT CREATE SESSION TO ZIP_CAB;
GRANT SELECT ON RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS TO ZIP_CAB;
```

### Querying the Data as Non-privileged User

Now is the moment of truth. You are going to impersonate a taxi company and verify that we only see entries that this company should be able to see.

Log in first with the owner account `BACP` and run this query:

```sql
SELECT COMPANY, COUNT(1)
FROM CHICAGO_TAXI.TRIPS
GROUP BY COMPANY
ORDER BY COMPANY;
```

> Now login as `YELLOW CAB` and run this query for comparison:

Reviewer 2: Is it a user name? We created a `ZIP_CAB` user only

Author: Fixed.

```sql
SELECT COMPANY, COUNT(1)
FROM RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS.TRIPS
GROUP BY COMPANY
ORDER BY COMPANY;
```

In the second case you only see the number of trips that Zip Cab made &mdash; and there are no other companies listed.

## Profiling

If you are curious about how queries using RLS perform, you can use [Exasol's profiling feature](https://docs.exasol.com/administration/on-premise/support/profiling_information.htm).

Run the following example as user `ZIP_CAB`. It demonstrates how Exasol executes a query that joins the large fact table and a dimension table. There is a narrow filter on the fact table and we want to see that this filter is applied _before_ the join.

> Otherwise an unnecessarily large amount of data would go into the join.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Otherwise, an unnecessarily large amount of data would go into the join.
```

```sql
ALTER SESSION SET PROFILE = 'on';

SELECT *
FROM RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS.TRIPS
LEFT JOIN RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS.COMMUNITY_AREAS ON TRIPS.PICKUP_COMMUNITY_AREA=COMMUNITY_AREAS.AREA_NUMBER
WHERE RLS_CHICAGO_TAXI_VS.TRIPS.TRIP_SECONDS < 400;

ALTER SESSION SET PROFILE = 'off';

FLUSH STATISTICS;
```

Now let's take a look at the profiling data we collected

```sql
SELECT STMT_ID, COMMAND_NAME AS COMMAND, PART_NAME, PART_INFO,
    OBJECT_SCHEMA, OBJECT_NAME, OBJECT_ROWS AS OBJ_ROWS, OUT_ROWS, DURATION 
FROM EXA_STATISTICS.EXA_USER_PROFILE_LAST_DAY
WHERE SESSION_ID = CURRENT_SESSION
ORDER BY STMT_ID, PART_ID;
```

Your result should look similar to this:

|STMT_ID|COMMAND|PART_NAME|PART_INFO|OBJECT_SCHEMA|OBJECT_NAME|OBJ_ROWS|OUT_ROWS|DURATION|
|-------|-------|---------|---------|-------------|-----------|--------|--------|--------|
|54|SELECT|COMPILE / EXECUTE||||||0.758|
|54|SELECT|PUSHDOWN||||||0.220|
|54|SELECT|PUSHDOWN||||||0.090|
|54|SELECT|SCAN||CHICAGO_TAXI|TRIPS|1000000|96|0.024|
|54|SELECT|OUTER JOIN|on REPLICATED table|CHICAGO_TAXI|COMMUNITY_AREAS|77|96|0.000|
|54|SELECT|INSERT|on TEMPORARY table||tmp_subselect0|0|96|0.009|
|55|COMMIT|COMMIT||||||0.029|

> The important part to realize here is that the `SCAN` happens _before_ the `OUTER JOIN`. And you should also notice that the number of rows going into the scan are a lot more than the result rows of the scan.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The important part to realize here is that the `SCAN` happens _before_ the `OUTER JOIN`. And you should also notice that the number of rows going into the scan is a lot more than the result rows of the scan.
```

If you look at the time spent for each part of the execution, you will notice that the vast majority of time is used up in the `COMPILE \ EXECUTE` phase. This is the UDF container starting and running the RLS Virtual Schema that rewrites your query.

Executing the resulting query is lightning fast.

## Conclusion

> In this tutorial we went trough a real world example where you learned how to securely setup an RLS-protected Virtual Schema in order to restrict what users are allowed to see.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we went through a real-world example where you learned how to securely set up an RLS-protected Virtual Schema in order to restrict what users are allowed to see.
```
